---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# 1. Inventory Assets

The asset inventory is a comprehensive list of assets owned by the organization, along with their attributes. While not every single asset needs to be listed, the inventory should include all major assets as defined by the organization’s distinction between capital and operational expenses. Typically, smaller items such as furniture and lamps are excluded. 

The first step in creating an asset inventory is identifying the types of assets and defining a structure for the inventory, known as an asset hierarchy.

## Asset Hierarchy

The asset hierarchy defines a framework for organizing the asset inventory. An asset hierarchy can be organized using specialization, decomposition, or a combination of both, depending on the organization’s needs, common practices, and the level of asset planning. Specialization involves categorizing assets based on specific characteristics or types, such as distinguishing between wood doors, metal doors, and composite doors. Decomposition, in contrast, involves breaking down assets into their individual components, such as door hinges, door hardware, and door frames. 

Creating an effective asset hierarchy is crucial for both costing and maintenance purposes. Different levels of the hierarchy may be required for accurate cost estimation and for scheduling maintenance activities. For example, in the case of a pump, the asset hierarchy for long term asset management planning might include only the pump as a whole. On the other hand for maintenance planning, this hierarchy could be broken downn into individual components, such as seals and bearings, which are maintained separately. Maintenance work orders would then specify the particular component being serviced, ensuring detailed tracking and efficient resource allocation.

Standard asset hierarchies already exist and can be used as is or adapted to the needs of the organization. Four commonly applied hierarchies are UniFormat, OmniClass, MasterFormat, and Uniclass, described below.

* UniFormat focuses on functional elements and systems, making it ideal for early design and budgeting by emphasizing the performance of building systems. It considers assets at the system level, such as structural systems, mechanical systems, and interior finishes.

* OmniClass offers a comprehensive, flexible structure that integrates various classification methods, making it suitable for managing detailed construction data across the entire project lifecycle. It considers a wide range of assets including construction entities, spaces, elements, products, work results, and more. OmniClass integrates MasterFormat (for work results) and UniFormat (for elements) to enhance its detailed classification capabilities.

* MasterFormat provides a detailed, work-result-oriented classification, essential for organizing specifications and ensuring all construction details are thoroughly covered. It considers assets in terms of specific construction components and activities, such as concrete, masonry, and electrical systems.

* Uniclass offers a broad, internationally aligned classification system that supports detailed project management and collaboration from design through to operation. It considers a wide array of assets including buildings, spaces, elements, systems, products, and construction activities.

## Identify and Locate Assets

To compile an asset inventory, it is essential to collect and organize available data according to the chosen hierarchy. Multiple sources of data should be utilized to ensure a comprehensive inventory. These sources can include staff reports, as-built drawings, bid documents, schedules of quantities, databases, models, maps, photos, and videos. However, not all information may be readily available from existing documents and databases. Therefore, on-site data collection is often necessary to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the asset inventory. In some cases, particularly for underground assets, the current location might differ from what is shown in as-built drawings or initial plans. Knowing the accurate location of buried utilities is crucial to avoid unnecessary excavations and the risks associated with accidentally hitting a pipe or an electricity cable.
 
Several technologies can be used to detect and locate underground utilities, including Magnotemeters, Electromagnetic line locators, Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR), acoustics, infrared thermography, and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID).

* Magnetometers measure magnetic fields and are widely used in infrastructure projects to detect buried ferrous metals such as pipes and reinforcement bars. They can detect large magnetic objects at significant depths. Modern magnetometers have been miniaturized and integrated into compact, cost-effective devices suitable for various applications in infrastructure management.

* Electromagnetic line locators require a metallic medium to act as a conductor. A signal is introduced into the utility line from an alternating current (AC) transmitter, and the resulting magnetic field is detected by a handheld receiver to provide location and depth information. This technique is suitable for locating buried electrical cables, gas lines, and metal water pipes.

* Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) is particularly effective for locating non-metallic assets, as it transmits electromagnetic wave pulses into the ground, which reflect off subsurface boundaries and are detected by a receiving antenna.  making it useful for identifying not only water pipes but also sewer, gas, and telecom lines.

* Acoustic location systems employ a sensitive receiver to detect sounds in pipelines, useful for water distribution pipes and gas lines. These systems can operate in 'passive' mode to pick up the sounds of water or gas flowing at joints and leaks, or in 'active' mode, where an acoustic transducer transmits sound waves along the pipeline, which are then analyzed at the surface.

* Infrared thermography can detect temperature variations influenced by soil properties, ground cover, and wind speed, and is used to detect leaks in various types of pipelines, including water, gas, and heating systems. However, it cannot measure the depth of the utilities.

* RFID uses electromagnetic fields to automatically identify and track tags attached to objects. These tags must be installed during the initial placement of the utility. They can be used for identifying both near-surface and deeply buried utilities, especially valuable in the oil and gas industry. 

These technologies can be combined, and the collected data can be fused to optimize the results. Knowing the specific ground conditions is important for selecting the parameters of the sensing devices and the parameters for the interpretation of the collected data. 

:::info Case Study: Mapping and Assessing the Underworld
Mapping the Underworld was a comprehensive 14-year research program in the UK, which aimed to locate all buried utility assets without excavation using a multi-sensor platform. Largely funded by the EPSRC, the initiative addressed the serious issues related to the inaccurate location of buried pipes and cables in congested urban areas. Starting in 2005, the project involved four complementary research efforts focused on developing a multi-sensor location tool, integrating mapping and position data, consolidating information into a single repository, and using RFID tags for future pipe location. The project successfully developed a multi-sensor device employing ground-penetrating radar (GPR), vibroacoustics, and electromagnetic technologies to locate all infrastructure in various ground conditions without excavation. By 2013, the program had demonstrated that only a combination of these technologies could reliably detect buried assets and assess their condition. Following this, the Assessing the Underworld (ATU) project began in 2013 to further develop these technologies for evaluating the condition of buried infrastructure. This phase included detecting asphalt surface degradation, mapping root extents of crops and urban trees, and providing decision support tools for utility owners, ultimately enhancing the management and preservation of critical underground assets.
:::

However, accurately locating all buried assets in a city might not be feasible. A prioritization of location approaches can be followed based on the risk of asset failure, beginning with simpler desktop approaches for low-risk assets and culminating in more costly on-site detection technologies. This approach highlights the fact that asset management planning is a continuously improving process. The asset management steps should be followed repeatedly, and can provide feedback to each other, not necessarily following the sequence outlined in these notes. Accounting for risks in collecting data also counteracts potential availability bias in future decisions. 
Another important aspect of locating and managing buried utilities is the creation and sharing of standard utility maps from different sources to ensure data quality. One applicable standard is the [ASCE Standard 38-02](https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784406458). Even though different organizations have been developing and updating underground utility maps for many years, private utility data are generally not shared with other stakeholders. For public utilities they might be managed by different departments in a siloed fashion. Thus, setting standards for recording and sharing public infrastructure as-built drawings and maps, whether they are constructed or renewed by public or private contractors, is key to efficient asset management decision-making.


### Data Reliability and Security

When first preparing an asset inventory, it is crucial to record the source of data and the confidence level as asset features. This information aids future decision-makers in locating original data and assessing its reliability. As assets are maintained, rehabilitated and replaced, it is equally important to maintain up to date records. To ensure data is not lost or overwritten, a record of truth should be selected, generally in a Geographic Information System (GIS). Other asset management systems should then connect to this record. For example, computerized maintenance management systems (CMMS) can be used to record and plan day-to-day maintenance activities. Decision Support Systems (DSS) can support mid to long-term capital planning. These systems should integrate data from different sources, such as GIS, finance, and work orders, facilitating the collaboration between different municipal departments.

:::info Case Study: City of Hamilton Data Confidence Scale

The City of Hamilton developed a comprehensive [corporate asset management plan](https://www.hamilton.ca/sites/default/files/2022-12/strategy-asset-management-plan-overview-jun2022.pdf) and within it established a useful scale for data confidence, as shown below

| Confidence Grade | Reliability | Accuracy |
|------------------|-------------|----------|
| **A - Very High** | Data based on sound records, procedures, investigations and analysis, documented properly and agreed as the best method of assessment. | Dataset is complete and estimated to be accurate +/- 2% |
| **B - High** | Data based on sound records, procedures, investigations and analysis, documented properly but has minor shortcomings. For example, some of the data is old, some documentation is missing and/or reliance is placed on unconfirmed reports or some extrapolation. | Dataset is complete and estimated to be accurate +/- 10% |
| **C - Medium** | Data based on sound records, procedures, investigations and analysis which is incomplete or unsupported, or extrapolated from a limited sample for which grade A or B data are available. | Dataset is substantially complete but up to 50% extrapolated data and accuracy estimate +/- 25% |
| **D - Low** | Data is based on unconfirmed verbal reports and/or cursory inspections and analysis. | Dataset may not be fully complete, and most data is estimated or extrapolated. Accuracy +/- 40% |
| **E - Very Low** | None or very little data held. | Dataset does not exist or very little accuracy. |
:::

The increasing amount of data collection and reliance on complex IT systems for infrastructure operation and management make cyber security an increasing concern. Managing IT infrastructure is key to ensuring wide municipal infrastructure performance and general public health and safety. Similar to other asset systems, IT systems should be assessed, maintained and replaced in order address security weaknesses. These and more best practices for municipal cyber security have been established by the [Association of Municipalities Ontario](https://www.amo.on.ca/sites/default/files/assets/DOCUMENTS/Reports/2020/AMunicipalCyberSecurityToolkit20200930.pdf). While some cities have begun to set cybersecurity plans and develop asset management plans for IT assets, cyber threats are usually not accounted for in the asset management plans of other asset systems. Thus, the relation between asset data collection and asset security still requires further study.

## Account for Natural Assets
Municipal assets generally comprise constructed civil infrastructure. Nevertheless, the natural resources and ecosystems that support cities provide services equivalent to those of certain engineered assets. Examples include aquifers, trees, forests, lakes, streams, wetlands, riparian areas, and foreshores. In order to fully account for their value to the community and the environment, natural assets should be considered in asset inventories, based on the service they provide. The value can be based on the total life cycle costs to replace them with engineered assets that would provide the same services. For instance, wetlands filter water and limit flooding, providing services equivalent to engineered treatment and storage.

With the support of the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative [(MNAI)](https://mnai.ca/), the Town of Gibsons in BC, Canada was reportedly the first in North America to integrate natural assets in asset management planning. The Town studied the benefits of a series of stormwater retention ponds, namely their stormwater retention and flood peak reduction. The cost of constructing equivalent detention ponds was applied to determine the economic value of the pond system. The alternative ponds were sized through stormwater management modelling. While there are examples of cities integrating specific natural assets within their asset management planning, a standard hierarchy for natural asset inventories and inclusion in asset management does not exist. Natural assets are also not considered “assets” from an accounting perspective, which hinders their management and protection. Thus, the development of standards for natural asset accounting in a municipal setting 

:::info Case Study: Curitiba, Brazil – An Early Adopter of Natural Infrastructure
The City of Curitiba in Brazil has been a notable example of innovative and environmentally responsive city planning. Since the 1970s, the city has executed numerous small-scale sustainable urban planning developments under the guidance of local governmental bodies. In addition to advanced waste management systems and the implementation of efficient bus rapid transit system, the City was early in identifying the value of natural assets. Extensive green spaces were strategically deployed, beginning in the 80s. The spaces now comprise over 35 parks and 1004 conservation areas, accounting for a fifth of the city's urban space. These not only contributed to biodiversity, water quality, and carbon emission reduction but also played a pivotal role in [flood mitigation](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9781003288718-77/developing-sustainable-city-curitiba-brazil-case-study-hanna-ruth-gustafsson-elizabeth-kelly).
Instead of following the prevalent trend in Brazil during the 1980s, which leaned towards investing in dams for flood control, Curitiba chose to capitalize on its green spaces. In regions at risk for flooding, including natural river basins, valley floors, and significant watershed streams, the city developed park systems featuring deep lakes for diverting floodwater. This initiative provided a dual benefit: it effectively mitigated urban and suburban flooding, as well as prevented habitat fragmentation, which can be a side effect of traditional flood control infrastructure like dams. This approach ensured the preservation of natural migration patterns for aquatic and associated species, enhancing biodiversity and species richness while protecting the urban spaces from flooding. Thus, Curitiba's innovative use of green spaces exemplifies a sustainable approach to urban planning and asset management.
:::

:::info Case Study: Pointe-du-Chêne, New Brunswick – Enhancing Coastal Resilience with Natural Assets

Pointe-du-Chêne, a coastal community in New Brunswick, has faced challenges due to coastal erosion and flooding, exacerbated by increasingly severe storms. To address these issues, the MNAI launched a pilot project to explore the benefits of natural assets for coastal resilience, as well as develop and test a [Coastal Toolbox (CT) model](https://mnai.ca/resources-and-reports-coastal-resilience-project/). This model was designed to quantify the flood and erosion protection benefits of natural assets like dunes, beach nourishment, shoreline planting, eelgrass planting, and submerged structures. The pilot study's findings indicated that natural assets could significantly reduce erosion impacts, with shoreline planting, beach nourishment, and dune improvement generating the most substantial long-term benefits. Although the flood protection benefits were smaller, they still offered considerable cost savings. 

:::
