---
sidebar_position: 4
---

# 4. Life Cycle & Replacement Costs

Lifecycle costs in an asset management context are generally considered from construction or installation until disposal. A more holistic definition, like that of lifecycle analyses, would account for costs starting from the extraction of raw materials, but this early-stage environmental and social cost accounting is not yet widely applied. Even during the asset's operation, environmental and social costs—such as emissions, resource use, or community impacts—are only beginning to be considered. While traditional asset management focuses on direct financial costs over the asset’s service life, there is a growing shift toward including these broader impacts as part of a more sustainable, long-term approach.

Lifecycles costs can largely be categorized as agency costs, nonagency costs and agency revenues. **Agency costs** are expenses directly incurred by the asset owner or manager, including construction, maintenance, and administration. **Nonagency costs** refer to indirect costs borne by users or society, such as delays and emissions. **Agency revenues** are the income generated by the asset through mechanisms like tolls, service rates, or taxes.

 ### Agency Costs

- **Construction or installation costs**: Early expenses for constructing or installing the asset.
- **Maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation**: Ongoing costs to ensure the asset keeps meeting expected levels of service. These can include preventative and corrective work.
- **Operating costs**: Costs associated operating the infrastrucutre, e.g. electricity, chemicals.
- **Cost of capital**: Interest and other expenses related to borrowing money to finance the asset.
- **Salvage value**: The estimated value recovered at the end of the asset's useful life.

### Nonagency Costs

- **User Costs**: Costs incurred by those who use the infrastructure, including delays, additional travel time, and service interruption.
- **Societal costs**: Broader impacts on those who might not use the asset, such as pollution health impacts.
- **Environmenta costs**: Impacts on ecosystems, biodiversity and climate, such as emissions.

### Agency revenue

- **Additional rates/tolls**: Increased revenue from rates or tolls paid by users.
- **Additional taxes**: Revenue from taxes associated with the asset's operation or benefits to the surrounding area.

Direct construction and maintenance costs typically include several mark-ups to cover additional expenses beyond the raw costs of labor and materials. These mark-ups often account for the following costs
- **Project Management**: Fees for the planning and coordination of the project.
- **Design Costs**: Expenses for engineering and architectural work before construction begins.
- **Construction Management**: Costs for supervision and quality control during the build.
- **Contractor Overhead**: Administrative expenses of the contractor.
- **General Contractor Profit**: Profit margins for the contractor.
- **Insurance**: Coverage for potential risks and liabilities.
- **Contingency**: A contingency amount for handling unforeseen costs or changes during the project.

:::info Case Study: Paris, France and New York City, United States of America - Reinventing assets

The Coulée Verte in Paris and the High Line in New York City showcase the transformative power of reinventing underutilized infrastructure. The [Coulée Verte](https://parissecret.com/decouvrez-lhistoire-de-la-coulee-verte-la-promenade-vegetale-de-paris/), an elevated urban garden built on an unused railway line, was established as a green lung for the city in 1993. This former railway line, dating back to 1859, became an inspiration for similar projects around the globe, proving that obsolete infrastructure could be reinvented for the public good, at a lower cost than demolition and revitalizing surrounding neighbourhoods. 
Following Paris's example, New York City transformed the decaying [High Line](https://edc.nyc/project/high-line) railway into an elevated park that revitalized the Chelsea neighborhood. Previously destined for demolition, two residents advocated for the High Line's conversion by citing the success of the Coulée Verte. Opening in 2009, the High Line became a pivotal asset in urban regeneration, enhancing the real estate value in its vicinity and becoming a famous tourist attraction. Similar projects have subsequently sprung up in cities like Philadelphia, Chicago, and Atlanta. Together, these projects highlight the potential of adaptive reuse in sustainable asset management.

:::

## Time Value of Money

In lifecycle costing, the time value of money is a crucial consideration since infrastructure assets can last for decades, and during that time, costs generally increase, and interest is accrued. The three following financial concepts are key:

- **Inflation**: A measure of how much prices for goods and services are rising over time.
- **Interest**: The cost of borrowing money.
- **Discount Rate**: Reflects the time value of money, relating future costs to their present worth. It can be estimated as the difference between the interest rate and the inflation rate.

To compare lifecycle costs effectively, they need to be considered within the same timeframe, such as present or annual costs. 

Present worth (PW) is a common method for doing this by discounting future costs back to their present value. 

$$
PW = \sum_{t=0}^{n} \frac{C_t}{(1 + d)^t}
$$

Where:
- **PW** is the present worth.
- **Cₜ** is the total costs at year t.
- **d** is the discount rate.
- **t** is the year (from 0 to n).
- **n** is the total number of years in the analysis period.

Note that the total costs at each year will be a sum of all types of costs mentioned before, agency and nonagency.

Costs can also be compared on an annual basis, with the Equivalent Uniform Annual Cost (EUAC):

$$
EUAC = PW \cdot \frac{i(1 + i)^n}{(1 + i)^n - 1}
$$

Where:
- **EUAC** is the equivalent uniform annual cost.
- **PW** is the present worth.
- **i** is the interest rate.
- **n** is the total number of years in the analysis period.